I came awake with an unpleasant shift in gravity. The road scrolled ahead of us under the bus headlights. It was not as if I had been fast asleep. I had come from a phase of restless unconsciousness, my body unhappily twisting, but my perceptions muted. This was unfailingly the effect of bus rides on me. We were only twenty minutes out, and I could already determine with certainty that any attempt at sleep would only increase the pain provoked by these cramped seats. I took turns reading my book and listening to music. Both of these I did on my iPhone. My book was called "Likely Story" and was about a woman living in Arizona who foresaw a disaster in her town, and attempted to convince the local government of the danger. Despite its predictable plot, I found myself passing hours reading without realizing. Margaret Lyelle was a single mother, taking care of her 8 year old son in the town of Teyschaw. While on the phone with her son's school teacher, Margaret had suddenly found herself in a different dimension entirely. With no grounding bodies to be found, she floated through a glowing mist into a celestial womb, covered in radiant mirrors, reflecting her face in infinite strange shapes and with varying expressions. Here she spun gently but uncontrollably. A quiet, light voice informed her that she was to listen very carefully. Then, she heard a second voice. It was her son. He never appeared to her or listened to a word she said, or yelled. It seemed he could not see or hear her. He spoke as if mumbling to himself about some sort of child's game. He was focused and quite amused by the purpose of his game, which she made out to be some sort of destruction. She continued to yell to him until the quiet first voice came back. "Your son is doing quite well," the voice said, pleased. "He will destroy Teyschaw because that is what I will have him do." The voice thanked her for her contribution. A large face loomed over Margaret, concerned. "Ma'am, can you please respond to me?" The paramedic waited, poised. "My son!" was all she could manage. Something soft hit my knee. So soft that for a second I thought I had imagined it. But even under the dim ceiling lights, I could make out a lock of hair. Brown and slightly curly, it had slipped out of the control of the woman sitting in front of me. She was keeled over in her seat, asleep. Her head hung lopsidedly out into the aisle, and yet her face was that of bliss. To my left, the man who had been facetiming his girlfriend for most of the time had converted his face into pudding, and was happily pressing it into the side of his massive backpack next to him. The man sitting behind him was awake, and stared blearily around like he was coming out of hypersleep and would need a few days to reaccess his memories. Then he looked at me. My eyes leaped off through the window and onto the road. Did I ever get away with this? Maybe despite my years of practice I had never convinced anybody that I wasn't looking at them. Her son's teacher had called to ask why Margaret's son had not come to school that morning. The doctors insisted that she stay in the hospital to make sure this was indeed an isolated episode. With desperate eyes she kept asking them where her son was. The police came in and calmly listened to her explanation. That she had some strange vision, and it didn't make sense but she needed to know that her son was okay. When finally she was informed that her son had not arrived at the school where she had dropped him off, she turned pale. Her lips became toothpicks and her eyebrows dropped and set with determination. My boxers were adhered to my butt and my shirt to my back as I descended the canted steps of the bus. The night air felt a little on the warm side, and the scent on the breeze recalled all the unhappy phenomena of the city. I pulled at my clothes to unpaste them from my skin. With only a side glance at my fellow travelers, I stepped off the curb island into a dark, warm wind. The metro was closed. I stood at the glass doors to the station, and it looked like the apocalypse. The darkness inside cast an ominous feeling that the metro would never be open again. The shadows of pillars looked like long holes torn in streaks through the ticket floors. Several tens of feet back, the metro station quickly melted into black nothing, and as it fell out of sight it seemed also to fall out of existence. I walked back towards the exit. Several men lay, wrapped in coccoons of cardboard and sheets on the grimy concrete. They slept scraped up against the walls with the scum of dried liquid and waste plastering the floor about them. Some slept with their heads on the ground, their cheeks pressed to the filth. With some effort I looked away from them, and quickened my pace. I needed to get home. There would be a bus or a tram that could take me there. A pair of open eyes glinted wide from one of the fragile bundles. A man. His eyes were fixed on mine. If anything I walked more quickly, but continued to stare. He watched me as one watches a horse race in which they have bet money on a losing horse. My hurry was an exercise in folly. Fruitless. Or was it anger on his face? Yes, it was anger. I had just awakened him. It must have been hard enough to sleep on solid stone. I took the steps two at a time. I was asleep at 8:31am. At 8:32am the lights came on in my bedroom. This is very reminiscent of living at home, since my mother would sometimes come into my room and loudly decree everything she expected me to do that day before I could even begin to comprehend words. I blinked my eyes, and thought immediately of my glasses. The room was a haze. And then it was like the lights were suddenly off again; the haze vanished behind a cloth. A yank pulled it tight to my face. I could do no more than twitch involuntarily before warm hands fell onto my back, pressing me face-first into the bed and pulling my hands behind my back. I felt the weight of someone on top of me. The rope wrapped itself around my wrists and my mouth was suddenly sealed shut like glue, and something adhered tightly to the sides of my head. It occurred to me that this would require many hands. There must have been at least three people in the room. I rose from the bed and turn over in the air under the grip of several hands. This was done awkwardly, like I might be dropped and fall on the hard wood floor. Something cold and wet suddenly touched my back. I quivered involuntarily, and felt my muscles go taut at the shock. The cold spread across my back and new epicenters flaired up at my calves and butt. As the freezing wetness spread up my sides, my lungs were squeezed out like a tomato crushed underfoot. I was being lowered into something. A numbness climbed into my limbs and crept up my chest and face. The cold substance rose over my eyes and I could only attempt to move my arms. Motionless, blind, and weak I felt so tired. I imagined I was a whale. I am a whale in an aquarium. It's a lovely large container with one big window to the air where people would walk around. The water is cool. I float aimlessly, my long whale body limp. I have never used this body before. I try an arm motion. As I expect I can gently move my flippers. I ease myself around to face the large window. Here I am: the star of the show. And yes, there are people here. They stare up at me, and though their faces are distorted by the glass, I can make out smiles. I can see how they turn to each other to talk about me. Parents recite facts about me to their children. They stand with their mouths open involuntarily. 